=head1 Title

Nonblocking and Streaming 

=head1 Overview

Modern versions of L<Catalyst> allow you to take charge of how your
write operations work.  This enables better support for working inside
common event loops such as L<AnyEvent> and <IO::Async> to support
non blocking writes to stream large files.

Lets explore how L<PSGI> implements delayed and streaming responses
and how we can use streaming response with an event loop to enable
use of nonblocking IO.  Then lets see how L<Catalyst> exposes that
API.  This part three of a four part series.

=head1 Introduction

We've seen how L<PSGI> allows us to stream long responses and even how
it works with HTTP 1.1 features such as keep alive.  Now, lets see how
those features can take advantage of non blocking IO, and how L<PSGI>
runs under event loops.

=head1 Nonblocking

Sometimes when you are streaming data you encounter a process that takes a
long time.  For example, you page requires several long running SQL queries
to build.  Or you have a simple case where you want to stream something
infinitely.  For example, here's an application that sends the time as a
string followed my a newline once a second, and continues doing so unless
the client breaks the connection:

    my $psgi_app = sub {
      my $env = shift;
      return sub {
        my $responder = shift;
        my $writer = $responder->(
          [200, [ 'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' ]]);

        while(1) {
          $writer->write(scalar localtime);
          sleep 1;
        }

      };
    };

You might do something like this as a heartbeat monitor, or to stream date
infinitely to a client (stuff like log into, server status, anything you
want realtime, or even for gaming applications where you are sending out
information about the location of a character in realtime).

The problem here is that when using a blocking server like L<Starman>
you can never have more infinite connections than you have running forks
(defaults to 5 in the current version of L<Starman>.)   So, if you are
running a huge gaming server that wants to send out continuous information
about the realtime locations of characters and actions what can you do?
You can run lots and lots of servers (expensive).  Or you can change your
architecture to have the clients poll the server at regular intervals to
get updated data.  This is a good option and can scale very well, but it
is not suitable for all use cases.  If you have that specific use case
where you need to maintain a long lived connection to each client, and you
expect 100s or thousands or more clients, what can you do?

Modern operating systems allow for a concept called 'non blocking I/O'
this means that when you initiate I/O, over a socket, or a filehandle,
you don't need to wait until the process is complete, but instead you can
register a callback (basically an anonymous subroutine) that gets 
called when the I/O job is complete.  You can even register callbacks
to handle exceptional events.  This means that instead of having a limited
number of forked processes that can handle one connection each, you can
have many (limited by how your operating system is setup and what resources it
has) connections all at once.  The trick here is that instead of doing
one thing at a time, we have an event loop which manages a schedule of
events.

Lets rewrite the blocking application to run under an evented server:

    use AnyEvent;
    use warnings;
    use strict;

    my $watcher;
    my $timer_model = sub {
      my $writer = shift;
      $watcher = AnyEvent->timer(
        after => 0,
        interval => 1,
        cb => sub {
          $writer->write(scalar localtime ."\n");
        });
    };

    my $psgi_app = sub {
      my $env = shift;
      return sub {
        my $responder = shift;
        my $writer = $responder->(
          [200, [ 'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' ]]);

        $timer_model->($writer);
        
      };
    };

There's a number of popular systems for managing event loops under Perl,
including L<POE>, L<AnyEvent> and L<IO::Async>.  For this example I choose
to use L<AnyEvent>.  Let's break down the application and see what (if anything)
this is buying us.

First off, instead of just creating an infinite loop, we create an anonymous
subroutine to encapsulate the L<AnyEvent> timer model.  If you look carefully
you'll notice this is a closure, which we need in order to make sure the 
C<$watcher> doesn't go out of scope.  C<$watcher> is a sort of pointer to
the event loop, and if it gets undefined by going out of scope, then the timer
itself would get removed from the event loop, and never run.  We could have
just as easily made this a real object, but a closure is simpler for this case.

Then, when the the L<PSGI> application runs and receives a request, it invokes
the closure with the C<$writer> object.  This then starts a timer event, which
every second runs the callback to output the time.

So, how is this better than the shorter and more simple version that runs under
L<Starman>?  This timer is not waiting a second between callbacks.  It's not
blocking the server.  As a result, the L<Twiggy> based server can accept many
more connections than L<Starman> with relatively low overhead in doing so.
Generally you can have hundreds or even thousands of concurrent connections
using this technique and have far lower overhead than if you have L<Starman>
running with 1000 or 2000 forked children.  We can see this in action

    $ TWIGGY_DEBUG=1 plackup bin/time-server-evented.psgi 
    Listening on 0.0.0.0:5000
    Twiggy: Accepting connections at http://0.0.0.0:5000

Now lets open this in telnet

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 5000
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    GET / HTTP/1.0

    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain

    Thu Nov 28 18:12:33 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:34 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:35 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:36 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:37 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:38 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:39 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:40 2013
    Thu Nov 28 18:12:41 2013

If you run this yourself (just checkout the repo on Github, links below) you
will note two things.  First of all, L<Twiggy> is not HTTP/1.1 compliant,
so we send a HTTP/1.0 GET request.  So L<Twiggy> isn't supporting chunked
encoding and you'd have to request keep alive if you want it.  Its not a big
deal just something to pay attention to.

Another thing you'd note is that unlike L<Starman>, L<Twiggy> does not have
a timeout on the connection.  This is because with L<Twiggy> the overhead on
the connection is very low, each incoming request does not need to tie up an
entire child fork (like with L<Starman>, or other forking and/or blocking
servers.)  Instead, the server listens for events and when an event comes in
the appropriate callback gets to handle it.  In the background, the event loop
is managing all the events.

The big win here is that the new version of this app can allow many, many
connections all at once, and each connection can listen to the infinite 
stream (unlike with L<Starman> where you are limited to the number of running
workers).

Lets prove that by using Apache C<ab> ( a simple load tester that comes with
the apache webserver).  First, lets change the application to finalize the
connection after 4 seconds:

    use AnyEvent;
    use warnings;
    use strict;

    my $watcher;
    my $timer_model = sub {
      my $writer = shift;
      my $count = 1;
      $watcher = AnyEvent->timer(
        after => 0,
        interval => 1,
        cb => sub {
          $writer->write(scalar localtime ."\n");
          if(++$count > 5) {
            $writer->close;
            undef $watcher;
          }
        });
    };

    my $psgi_app = sub {
      my $env = shift;
      return sub {
        my $responder = shift;
        my $writer = $responder->(
          [200, [ 'Content-Type' => 'text/plain' ]]);

        $timer_model->($writer);
        
      };
    };

Start this up:

    $ TWIGGY_DEBUG=1 plackup bin/five-times-evented.psgi 
    Listening on 0.0.0.0:5000
    Twiggy: Accepting connections at http://0.0.0.0:5000/

Ok so each request is going to take 4 seconds to finish.  We can see that
via telnet:

    $ telnet 127.0.0.1 5000
    Trying 127.0.0.1...
    Connected to localhost.
    Escape character is '^]'.
    GET / HTTP/1.0

    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Content-Type: text/plain

    Thu Nov 28 19:56:15 2013
    Thu Nov 28 19:56:16 2013
    Thu Nov 28 19:56:17 2013
    Thu Nov 28 19:56:18 2013
    Thu Nov 28 19:56:19 2013
    Connection closed by foreign host.

So, if a similar application was running under L<Starman>, with 5 running forks
(the default), and you hit the server with 100 simultaneous requests, you'd 
expect the entire thing to take about 80 seconds (likely more because of network
latency and so forth, but it would never be faster).  What happens if we hit
this with Apache C<ab> with the same concurrent 100 requests?

    $ ab -n100 -c100 http://127.0.0.1:5000/
    This is ApacheBench, Version 2.3 <$Revision: 655654 $>
    Copyright 1996 Adam Twiss, Zeus Technology Ltd, http://www.zeustech.net/
    Licensed to The Apache Software Foundation, http://www.apache.org/

    Benchmarking 127.0.0.1 (be patient).....done
      
    Server Hostname:        127.0.0.1
    Server Port:            5000

    Document Path:          /
    Document Length:        0 bytes

    Concurrency Level:      100
    Time taken for tests:   4.039 seconds
    Complete requests:      100
    Failed requests:        2
       (Connect: 0, Receive: 0, Length: 2, Exceptions: 0)
    Write errors:           0
    Total transferred:      4650 bytes
    HTML transferred:       150 bytes
    Requests per second:    24.76 [#/sec] (mean)
    Time per request:       4039.357 [ms] (mean)
    Time per request:       40.394 [ms] (mean, across all concurrent requests)
    Transfer rate:          1.12 [Kbytes/sec] received

So the whole thing took a bit over four seconds!  And we handled the 100 connections
all at the same time!

That's the upside of the extra work of running everything in an evented manner
and taking advantage of nonblocking IO.

B<Note> I just want to point out to make a robust system you need to take care
to monitor and handle error events, since everything is running under one big
process any uncaught errors can crash the server!

B<Note> I also want to point out that although high concurrency is a great trick
to have, concurrency alone isn't the only answer to high scale.  Depending on the
type of application you are building it may or may not have value.

Ok, so now you have the basics of evented and nonblocking IO!  Lets port this
very application to run as a L<Catalyst> application!  (In the next article
of course...)

=head1 For More Information

Code associated with this article:

L<https://github.com/perl-catalyst/2013-Advent-Staging/tree/master/1to4-Nonblocking-Streaming>

=head1 Summary

We've introduced how to use an event loop with a non blocking webserver such as
L<Twiggy> to write a non blocking PSGI application.

=head1 Author

John Napiorkowski L<email:jjnapiork@cpan.org>

=cut
