=head1 Title

Plack::Middleware::Debug and Catalyst

=head1 Overview

There are a few useful plack middleware's that can help with day to day development
of your catalyst application. In this article I'll be giving a quick example of
how to set them up and a quick run down of the use. Nothing exciting, but it's
useful stuff.

=head1 Prerequisites

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug> L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::CatalystStash>

=head1 The Code

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug> contains a collection of debug panels, even one for
showing the contents of the Catalyst Log.

We can enable the middleware in the catalyst app, rather than in the psgi. That
way we can do some tricks to only enable it for debug mode, or when running on
certain hosts etc.

    package MyApp;
    use Moose;

    use Catalyst;

    __PACKAGE__->config(
        'psgi_middleware', [
            'Debug' => {panels => [
                'Memory',
                'Timer',
                'CatalystLog',
                'CatalystStash',
            ]},
        ],
    );

    __PACKAGE__->setup;

This will give us a panel on any page with a </body> tag and a content type of
text/html the above panels, which can be used to see how much memory was used,
how long a page request took, what was written to the catalyst log (not including
the request log) and what is in the stash.

It's only simple, but it all helps.

=head1 See Also

There's a wide selection of Plack debug middlewares available, here's a few that
are worth investigating.

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::DBIC::QueryLog>

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::CatalystPluginCache>

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::Profiler::NYTProf>

L<Plack::Middleware::Debug::W3CValidate>

L<https://metacpan.org/search?q=plack+middleware+debug>

You can see the code for this article at L<https://github.com/perl-catalyst/2013-Advent-Staging/tree/master/Plack-Debug>

=head1 Author

Mark Ellis L<email:nobody@cpan.org>

=cut
